# Acknowledgments

It's easy to underestimate how hard it is to write a book. My wife says her
superpower is forgetting how bad things can get; maybe she's been rubbing off on
me, because only a very crazy or very forgetful man would decide to write a
third book. And that's not to mention all the books that were started and died
in the water before this one took hold.

This particular piece of prose has been a wonderful whirlwind. The seed came to
me while hanging out with some friends who wanted to combine quantum mechanics
with game theory. I offered to sit down with them to help formalize their ideas
in Agda. I had no idea what I was doing, but it quickly became clear that my
ability to weave proofs in Agda more than made up for my abject failure to
understand what they were going on about.

That night I jotted down some quick notes about what such a book could look
like. Little did I know, those scribbles would come to dominate the next year of
my life. A lot has changed in that year---I've gotten married, gone back to
school, and have done a lot of growing up. Through all of it, I've been working
on this book, and it's frankly a little bittersweet to be finished this thing
that's been with me for so long.

Many people were involved in helping tie the knot in reality from which this
book springs forth. Some of the particularly instrumental people in this journey
are:

*Erin Jackes,* for being my muse, my guiding star, and my one true love. Without
her support and outstanding company, I never would have found the wherewithal to
make it to the finish line.

*Reed Mullanix,* whom has never once balked at taking an hour out of his day to
explain something to me. And I ask *very often.* Most of the technical things I
know have been taught to me by Reed.

*Conal Elliott,* for his unwavering dedication to beauty and simplicity, and for
inspiring me to demand more from my work. I pray that one day my taste will be
half as good as his.

Other fantastic people whom I can't praise enough include Solomon Bothwell, Shae
Erisson, Li-yao Xia, Jonathan Lorimer, Asad Saeeduddin, Callan McGill, and the
whole Cofree Coffee crew. Andrew McKnight and Yanze Li were instrumental in
helping me get through some nasty proofs. Farhad Mehta, John Hughes, Judah
Jacobson, Ryan Hunter, thank you all for your support.

The punchy cover was designed by Laura Stepšytė. The interior styling was
inspired by the work of Bob Nystrom, and the color scheme is lifted from Byrne's
Euclid. The book is compiled through an unholy matrimony made possible by John
MacFarlane, Rijnard van Tonder and Amélia Liao, among others. Some ideas for
what a book on Agda should be like came from *Programming Language Foundations
in Agda,* although I must admit (abashedly) that I haven't actually read it.
Yet.

Finally, my most sincere gratitude goes out to everyone who has helped make Agda
happen. It's a marvelous piece of technology with a delightful community, and is
the most fun I've had programming in years.

Thank you all most sincerely, from the very bottom of my heart.


FlushRight

: Sandy Maguire\
  Vancouver, Canada, October 2023.


# About the Author

Sandy is a self-described author, programmer, musician, trouble-maker. He's been
slinging code for two decades, and has only recently figured out how to do it
well. He's a pianist and avid car-hater.

When he's not spreading the good word about purely functional programming, he
spends his time jumping over things and trying not to blow up coffee machines.

Sandy lives in Vancouver with his wife, Erin.


# Other Books by Sandy Maguire

* Thinking with Types, 2018, Cofree Press `sdcp:br`
  available at [https://leanpub.com/thinking-with-types](https://leanpub.com/thinking-with-types)

* Algebra-Driven Design, 2020, Cofree Press `sdcp:br`
  available at [https://leanpub.com/algebra-driven-design](https://leanpub.com/algebra-driven-design)

